My name is Logan Pratico. I'm a data engineer at the Legal Services Corporation, where I
work on a relatively new project called the Civil Court Data Initiative. So just to sort
of start out and center this talk a little bit on the issues that I'm going to be discussing
for the next 15 to 20 minutes, let's just start with, you know, what is the civil justice
system? Civil court is somewhat different from criminal court, which I'm not sure, but
I would imagine a lot of you all in this room are probably much more familiar with. That's
going to be the things where, you know, you commit a crime like, you know, robbery or
something like that. You're often arrested by a police officer. You go to court. You
plead guilty or not guilty. You're handed a verdict and then you go to jail. Civil court
is a different side of that, right? So civil court is going to be the things that you're
going to appear in court for, but where you didn't necessarily commit a crime. So this
is going to be things like eviction, which is going to be the focus of what I'm talking
about today, but also things like debt collection, guardianship, you know, cases like that, right?
These areas are slightly different, but in a lot of ways they can be equally as harrowing.
So for eviction, for example, what happens in these cases can uproot a fundamental human
right for a lot of individuals, their right to shelter, their right to a home. It can
leave folks with forcing them to leave their sense of community, their sense of belonging.
A lot of their possessions are often left behind into sort of a world of uncertainty
where you don't necessarily know where you're going to be sleeping next or where you're
going to be just at home next. The organization that I work for, Legal Services Corporation,
was stood up in the 1970s because, with the explicit purpose to provide legal assistance
to individuals that are navigating this system, because a key difference between criminal
and civil court is that folks aren't guaranteed the right to a lawyer. So that classic image
that you all might have for something like law and order, where a person's Miranda rights
are being read and they're being told that if you can't afford a lawyer, one will be
appointed to you, that doesn't happen in civil court. Individuals are often left to
navigate an incredibly complex legal process entirely unassisted. And so our goal is to
essentially provide funding to legal aid organizations across the country that work to represent
these individuals who qualify in court. Now, the project that I work on within Legal Services
Corporation is known as the Civil Court Data Initiative. And we essentially believe that
court data, when standardized and analyzed in aggregate, can be an incredibly powerful
tool in helping to allocate limited resources and finite time for these legal aid organizations
working on the ground. So you can see here is our current map of coverage. This was taken
from our website, which you can find the URL up in the corner there. And the first
thing you might notice is that there's a lot of white on the screen. That's because we
don't have all of the data yet. We have a lot of states for which we just don't know
what the eviction landscape looks like. To put that in context, imagine if we just couldn't
say how many people died of heart disease every year. Imagine what that would mean for
policy and just general decisions from, you know, in the medical field, all of that. That's
what the eviction landscape certainly looked like in 2019 when this map was completely
white. And in a lot of ways, what it still looks like today. Our goal is to be able to
answer questions like, you know, or to be able to say things like, you know, how many
folks, how many individuals in Virginia are facing eviction of all renters? And the answer
might surprise you. There were relative to the number of renter households in the state
of Virginia, there were about 12% of those were facing eviction filings. These numbers
are high. And that's sort of what we're trying to present with collecting this data. To get
technical for a second, and not too technical, we have our data pipeline essentially looks
like this. And this is pretty simplified. But this is the basic idea. We have a data
source, which for us can be court websites, bulk data downloads. You know, there are only
three up here. But to put it into context, there are over 1,200 different unique jurisdictions
across the entire country. And we're working to basically collect all of that data and
aggregate it into a standardized system. We use a variety of sort of cutting edge data
orchestration platforms like DBT and Prefect and AWS services. The list goes on and it
would make me sound smarter than I am to just sort of say them out loud. But the end goal
is to kind of just have a set of standardized data sets that we can put in a data lake.
And this is, you know, overall relatively simple. The idea is to basically just have
queryable data that our team of research analysts and other folks can use. It can be incredibly
complicated to do that standardization. But the end goal is to essentially just have databases
that are accessible to folks. And what our data pipeline looked like for a while was
that we were basically just subsetting that data and providing it to the end user, the
legal aid organizations. This pretty much exclusively, when we were first starting out,
took the form of just spreadsheets. Really boring stuff, to be completely honest. I mean,
I know that a lot of folks in this room are familiar with, you know, R and other data
science tools. And you might look at a data set like this and say, there's a lot that
I can do with that. It's standardized. It's in a long format. You know, ported into R.
And you could have some visualizations going. You know, there's a lot of fun stuff that
you can do with that. But remember, the folks that we're trying to get this data to aren't
data scientists. They're lawyers. They don't come from that computer science or data science
or even just any sort of coding background. They've spent their lives in courts studying
legal text. In the same way that if you were to ask me, you know, can you tell me what
like, can you just read this legalese and interpret it? And I would, you know, look
at you with wide eyes. The same thing kind of happens, you know, if you give someone
with a legal background a spreadsheet and basically say, you know, answer whatever question
you have. But that's kind of what we wanted to do, is we wanted to be able to provide
folks with the tools to answer questions that they had. We didn't really want to answer
questions for them. We just wanted to, or tell them, rather, tell them what questions
they had and provide the answers. We wanted these folks to be able to basically, you know,
answer questions that were specific to their context. A story that I like to tell with
this, or I don't really like to tell, but I think it's a good example here, is that
when we were using this method of basically just sending off data sets to different legal
aid organizations, we had for a particular grantee, a particular legal aid organization
that we were working with, we had sent them a data set, and we uploaded it to Box, just
as a, it was our file sharing platform. And we, you know, emailed it, sent it off. Didn't
really hear back for about two weeks. And then in a team meeting, we were, you know,
just internally talking about it, and we circled back. We thought, you know, whatever happened
with that, did they use it? And so we went back, and we looked at that Box link, and
we realized that we hadn't actually shared it externally. We had uploaded it to Box,
but it was only shared within our organization. And so nobody could actually see it outside
of us. And the people that were, the folks we were sharing it with never reached out
to us. They never asked us, you know, they never said, hey, you know, we clicked on the
link and we can't actually access it. And I think that, you know, what better way to
show that, like, the data that you're sending off isn't being used or isn't important than
just the fact that, like, they can't, they didn't even try and access it, or they didn't,
or maybe they tried to access it, and then when they couldn't, they didn't care enough
to actually follow up. So that was a real eye-opening moment for us when we kind of
realized, you know, this data isn't actually being used. We're, we have this really complex
pipeline going from court website all the way to standardized data sets. It's getting
95% of the way there. But then we just weren't going the last 5%. And we weren't saying,
you know, what is it that is actually going to help us to meet these legal aid organizations
where they are and get them the data that they need. And that's when we sort of revised.
And this was a little bit before the quarto phase. So I know that this is a little bit
crazy. So this is a little bit out of date. But we used our markdown to essentially generate
weekly reports that took the same data from the spreadsheets that I was showing you on
the last page and just put it into a really easily readable, easily digestible format
that answered surface-level questions, in our eyes, sort of the lowest common denominator
of questions that you could answer across all of our court data. And we provided that
to our end users, to the legal aid organizations. You can see here are just a couple of examples.
For Vermont, you can see, you know, it has a little bit, I'm not sure if you can read
that text, but essentially what it says up there at the top is just a brief introduction.
We collect data across 14 counties in Vermont. And this graph generated in ggplot just sort
of shows, you know, that's what the landscape kind of looks like across the board. That's
what eviction filings look like over the past year. Similarly, you have an outline for Connecticut
there that basically just shows, it's a heat map that just shows eviction filing hotspots.
So areas in darker red are going to be areas that have the most eviction filings or more
eviction filings than the areas in a lighter color red. So yeah, so I kind of alluded to
this before, but the questions that we were answering were pretty basic or trying to answer
with these memos that were only, you know, two pages in length and didn't really have
a lot of text. It was just, you know, what do eviction filing trends look like over the
past year in a particular state? Or, you know, what counties have the most eviction filings?
As well, you know, how does representation differ between landlords and tenants in these
cases? The answer might surprise you. It's wide. There is a huge disparity between representation
for tenants and landlords. And really just, you know, in answering the, or in creating
these memos, I just want to hammer the point home that we weren't trying to answer every
question that they might have. Instead, which is something that we were doing with our previous
data sets. Instead, we were just providing a taste of what we had with the data and welcoming
them to come back to us, the organizations to come back to us and ask us questions and
say things like, I had no, or I had some idea that my county had the highest rate of eviction
filings in the entire state, but this confirms it. And I'd really like to, you know, know
who the top filers are, who the top companies are that are evicting folks in my state, or
what is the, what are the judgments? What are the outcomes of these cases? And what
does that look like? And so it took us from this data pipeline to a slightly revised version
where we still had the data source and the data lake, but rather than going from standardized
data sets directly to the end user, essentially what we were doing was just going by way of,
you know, data memos for our markdown and passing that along. Again, this diagram is
a little bit oversimplistic in a way, because I think that it implies that we stopped sending
data or spreadsheets, which isn't true. We had data memos, but we really used those as
just sort of a jumping off point, as a way to get the ball rolling, to get the conversation
going around sharing data. And what ended up happening is, like I said, folks came back
to us and asked us, you know, can I have this data? And then the spreadsheets that we were
sending them were things that were actually important, things that they actually wanted,
which is obviously always key when you're sending off data. We found that, you know,
we went from sending off data that nobody had asked for and nobody was looking at, to
folks actually, like, not being able to send data off fast enough. We had to grow our team
because we couldn't respond to all of the specific data requests that we were getting,
which is always a great thing to do. And so some of the outcomes from this work,
there were a couple of different things. Principally, we had improved data accessibility
and understanding. So, again, folks were no longer having to, you know, work in Excel
to find an answer to their specific question. They could just have that analysis done for
them. This also improved access via just sharing the information directly. Beyond that, we
had time efficiency. And this is both time efficiency on our end, because we weren't
coming up with custom data sets to send off in anticipation of a specific legal aid organization's
needs. Instead, we were zooming out to the state level and automatically generating these
reports. You know, we put them on, for those of you familiar with Amazon Web Services,
we put them on an EC2 instance in Amazon Web Services and kind of just let it run in the
cloud. And it does that every day, or excuse me, every week. So, every Monday, I log on
to my computer and just sort of double check the output of the Word documents and make
sure that, you know, everything looks good. We also have more efficient tests that are
running programmatically. But as a final check, that's really what I do every Monday is just
over my cup of coffee, I look at each individual document and I make sure that it's looking
good. And that's the extent of it. And then we can just sort of let them live there and
share them and, you know, revisit things on a quarterly basis, rather than having to regenerate
new documents every week or for every individual occasion. On the part of the legal aid organizations,
again, not having to do the analysis with our data, that's a huge time saver. And then
the last thing is just increased conversation, which is really what our end goal is, is
to be able to talk to folks and, you know, get their insight of how the data can best
help them. And that's definitely a downstream of this. So, as a recap, aggregating, cleaning,
standardizing this data was really sort of the first step in the process. But we thought
that it was the whole process. We thought that just if we were going to be able to collect
all of this disaggregate information and, you know, like people would naturally be interested
in it. And that was something that we learned just isn't the case. Instead, we had to take
a less is more approach to answering more just superficial questions initially. But
seeing that, you know, that would lead to increased conversation and more data sharing
down the road. And in the end, this really improved engagement and understanding of the
data. So, thank you very much. I'll say that if you're interested in viewing the memos
that I've been talking about, there is a QR code there that you can sort of scan that.
But yeah, happy to answer any questions. Thank you.
Thank you so much, Logan. We have time for at least one question. So, what are your planned
or aspirational next steps for data sharing with your stakeholders?
Yeah, so that's an excellent question. So, I think that the big thing, right, is creating
interactive visualizations in sort of like a dashboard format. So, we have our website,
which you can see at the URL there. And we have these static memos. But the website is
more of a public facing, you know, that is very, both of these are very public facing,
which can limit the amount of data that we really want to publish on it because we don't
want to just give out all of the data for security, privacy concerns. And so, the end
goal would be to create a dashboard that allows specific folks like these grantee, we call
them grantees because we do fund them. That's the main work that LSC does, is to essentially
provide them with information that way, sort of more privately.
Thank you again.